
---
layout: post
title: "Domain strategy cont'd: 1-800-Dot-Dev"
date: 2026-01-04
authors:
  - name: Delano
    to: https://blog.onetimesecret.com/about
    avatar:
      src: /img/portrait-profile-pic-delano-2025-m.png
image:
  src: /img/blog/2026/ots-dot-dev-hotline.svg
badge:
  label: Engineering
readingTime: 5
draft: true
---

---

Scraps

- Not many people advocate for either extreme (the ones that do tend to offer violent dismissals about being punched in the face or something about being on a battlefield). (graphic futilists?)
- So how to choose? Sometimes we don't have the freedom to choose. But when we do? Or how to cope when we don't?

My theory on planning projects goes like this:

- There's a continuum with chaos at one end and certainty on the other.
- Everyone tends to be comfortable at some point along that line, depending on their appetite for risk.
- Zero planning gets close to maximum chaos; maximal planning gets close to infinity time units.

On this continuum, I'm a leftist moving towards centrism. As a chronic and hopeful lateral thinker, it's hard for me to sit down and plan in a linear fashion. The answers don't come quickly without more context and when they do, they don't travel in a straight line from point to point. It's more like a maze of fuzzy potentials with sporadic moments of clarity.


**Removed content for future posts:**

**Post idea: "LLM tooling and the shift from coding to designing"**
> It's wild to think that in the time it took from then until now, the quality of LLM tools and our early-days understanding of how to use them effectively (neè, how to avoid the traps, sinkholes, and dead ends) has improved so much. At this point I spend more time in conversations about the work and design ideas and concepts and the naming of things than the actual coding of the thing. This is what I meant about how I'm moving towards centrism: more time spent in chaotic planning and less time coding, because the work produced is a manifestation of the design that already somewhat exists.

**Post idea: "Secretary Links announcement"**
> And it's prevented us from more actively promoting our API. There are a bunch of novel usecases that we want to show and demonstrate how to use. I know from several projects-past (projects gone-by?) that being able to present something to users guaranteed no more than once is useful but not necessarily a core capacity of many codebases. Like it would be really nice if we could deliver this survey that we want the person to fill out securely and it's important they can't accidentally submit it more than once.
>
> As a homegrown demonstration, we'll be opening up a new feature/product we are calling [Secretary Links](https://secretarylinks.com) to early testers in April ([wrong term?]). A secretary link is a kind of one-time use link that you can send to someone and have them attach files, images, notes, links etc that only you can receive.

**Post idea: "Breaking up with Postman / new API tooling stack"**
> - Postman disappointment
>   - Poor return on investment of time (a few weeks total in the year prior)
>   - Appreciate the monitoring was helpful
>   - In TV there's jumping the shark. In software, there's Oraclizing? Sun, Java, MySQL. Postman. Redis the company.
>   - The dream of designing/defining APIs, testing, documentation did not die there though. It's still alive and tooling getting better.
>
> - Checked out a few. Experimented with prototyping.
>   - Decided to continue using OpenAPI 3+
>   - Narrowed down to https://github.com/scalar/scalar, bump.sh, a DIY API drift detector.
>   - https://buildwithfern.com/ -- acquired by Postman. Goodnight Irene. I would have been so reverse chuffed if I was doing this work a couple months ago, only to get Oracle'd twice by the same company.
>
> - Bump.sh
>   - api.onetimesecret.com
>   - automatic changelog, big win
>   - automatic part of PR workflow, fails on breaking change
>
> - Back to separate monitoring. Small price, plenty of good tools for that.
> - Everything else equal, the end result is a net win.

---
